Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. We'll be talking to science fiction author
Theodore Sturgeon this week, completing an interview we began some months ago.
Sturgeon, of course, has been a science fiction fantasy writer since the golden
age of science fiction, beginning in the late 1930s. Many of his novels and
short stories are classics in the field, and his influence on writers who came
after him has been incalculable. Sturgeon is noted as a stylist, that is, as a
writer whose use of language is both distinctive and remarkable. We asked him if
his style was natural to him or if it was a deliberate choice. It's absolutely
deliberate. The creation of a style, you can go a long way in the literary
business. Steinbeck did it. Aldous Huxley did it. One of the stunning examples
is Ray Bradbury. But you develop a style and then you stick to it. Pretty soon
you become imitable. That is to say, anybody with any real facility with words
can sit down and write a pure paragraph of Steinbeck or, for that matter,
Hemingway. To imitate Hemingway and Steinbeck is very, very easy. And Bradbury,
particularly, is extremely easy to imitate. But you don't imitate Samuel
Delaney, for example. You don't imitate, I mean, not by the paragraph. I'm not
saying that you can sit down and write a Bradbury story or a Hemingway story.
That's a different matter. But we're talking just about the matter of style.
And, yes, it's a very conscious effort on my part to be able to write with
facility in any of a number of styles. And sometimes they're first-person
stories. And I write out of the mouth of the person who's talking. And not
everybody talks, you know, in a high literary style. That's what I thought
Aldous Huxley for, mostly. You read an Aldous Huxley novel and Aldous Huxley
talks like Aldous Huxley. And old men talk like Aldous Huxley. And little girls
talk like Aldous Huxley. It's a monotongue. All the words come out of all the
mouths with the same kind of cadence. And I don't consider this really top
writing. Why I admire Delaney so much is that when he talks ghetto black, it is
for real. But if he has two characters discussing modern American poetry, they
talk in the terms of William Carlos Williams or T.S. Eliot. And he knows. He's
got a good ear. He knows the cadence of this kind of writing. And I admire that
so very much. That you can't imitate. And so I consciously do that.
Sturgeon's style is often as important to the impact of his stories as character
or plot is. And he's been praised often for his attention to language. But he's
not always satisfied with his work. One of his better known stories, Microcosmic
God, he would like to disown. It's based on a fascinating concept. A miniature
world created by a scientist with tiny intelligent beings on it. The scientist
can observe centuries of development in the micro society because these
creatures live at a greatly accelerated pace. And as the tiny beings achieve an
advanced high technology society, the scientist spies on them and uses their
discoveries for his own purposes. But Sturgeon is not happy with his story.
Yeah, I'm not too fond of that story. Not because the idea isn't unique. It is.
That was a brand new kind of an idea. But because it was so badly written. It
was the first science fiction story I wrote. And it was, there was so much that
I did not know about writing. One of the most important things about people as a
whole, and if you're going to write, you're going to write people well, is that
nobody's all bad. Nobody's all good either. But the heavy in there was the bank
president. And he's cut out of 100% pure cardboard. He is so poorly written. And
that angers me every time I think of it. If I were to write it today, he would
be very dimensional. And there would be some good things about him, too. And
then you could believe it. And the idea itself of the little people under the
dome was so overwhelming that nobody else but me apparently noticed how badly
that story is written. More Theodore Sturgeon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been
the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Theodore Sturgeon has always constructed
real, believable characters in his science fiction and fantasy. Which used to be
unusual in science fiction back in the 30s and 40s when Sturgeon was
establishing his reputation as a writer. Many of Sturgeon's people are, in some
sense of the word, misfits. They are searching for something. They're incomplete
somehow. And they're usually different than others around them. The characters
in Sturgeon's novel, More Than Human, are good examples. Right. That work is
built around an idiot, a pair of orphaned twins, an adolescent girl, and a
mongoloid baby, all outcasts from society. Many of Sturgeon's other stories have
misfits as their protagonist, too. We asked him why. Well, I think a misfit has
a chance to be objective. And for one thing, he sees society as a whole from its
underbelly or from way off at one side. Essentially, it's not so much misfits.
The key to what I write, I think, is loneliness. I learned early that you can
write about excitement, you can write about adventure, you can write love and
sex and so on. And basically, in each case, you don't hit too many people. But
if you write about loneliness, everybody's an expert. I'm fond of saying that if
you know some guy who collects pheasant feathers, and that's his whole
preoccupation, and you write a story that involves pheasant feathers, and you
know what you're talking about, he's going to love it. But the incidence of
people in the general population who collect pheasant feathers is very small.
But the point is that because you wrote to an expert of an expertise, you see,
you grab him. Now, what are people as a whole mostly expert at? Loneliness. The
world is full of experts on loneliness. It's something that everybody recognizes
when he sees it. So, it's not so much that these people are misfits, it's that
they're lonely. And I think that that's the hook that I can throw into people
the hardest. Sturgeon tries to counter this loneliness with love. He often has
his characters lose their loneliness by experiencing love of some sort. But
readers should be warned that it may not be the kind of love they're used to
reading about or seeing on the movie screen. Not always. The World Well Lost and
Case and the Dreamer are two of the stories that concern very different sorts of
love. One of Sturgeon's best-known stories is a powerful statement on love and
compassion, though it's the highest sort of love given to the whole human race.
The story is called Thunder and Roses and it was published not long after the
atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima. The United States has been devastated by a
nuclear attack and the last American military installation that could retaliate
chooses not to. The reason is to save humanity, to give our species a chance to
rebuild. Sturgeon talks about the story. That's a very interesting story. That
was written, you know, when the dust was still settling over Hiroshima. It's
probably the first atomic doom story that was written after the bomb was
dropped. It was written in late 1945.
And I wrote that with considerable passion. There wasn't anybody in the world
who understood what had happened except the people in the science fiction
fraternity and maybe one or two rather forward-thinking scientists at Oak Ridge
and in the state of Washington. And for the rest of the world thought it was
just another big bang. But in science fiction there, John Campbell had been
publishing atomic power and atomic war stories for 15 years before that. I mean,
we all understood what had happened. Every single person who'd been writing or
reading science fiction understood precisely what had happened and what it meant
to the world. Now, of course, it's become pretty much in the forefront but we
all saw it coming. Very bad. An ugly situation. Sturgeon says he gets a lot of
response about the story and it's been reprinted many times. As a matter of
fact, Ben Bubba was just about to publish it in Omni as a classic when he left
and I don't know what the situation is for the story again but chances are it
will show up there. We'll continue our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon on
our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
ScienceFiction of the Anders Rede Arick rates of terminal
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Science fiction author Theodore Sturgeon
has written some great horror stories. We asked him if he enjoys writing them.
Sometimes, yes. It's nice to give a... They have an amazing impact on people
sometimes. Although nowadays I think they're being vastly overdone. And why
people are flocking to see all these imitations of the exorcist and so on, I
don't know. It's depressing. It really is. And each one you see, of course, has
less impact than the one before. And it's got to be more bloody and more gory
and more horrible and more flash brains and buckets of gore and so on. So it
loses its impact. You get overdoses of that stuff. But there's a certain
something in the titillation of horror. I wrote one story. It was called
Professor Teddy Bear. Years later, I went to a convention and a lady came up to
me and she was all clawed. She was all clawed my eyes out. She was so furious
for having written that story. It seemed that when she read it, she didn't get
any sleep for two weeks. And in some peculiar way, she blamed me for it. That
is, as if I had personally written it personally to upset her. However, that
kind of reaction is very rare. Mostly people kind of enjoy it because basically
they know they're safe in spite of the fact that you have been living in terror
for a little while.
Another of Sturgeon's horror stories that has had a profound effect on some
people is called Bianca's Hands. It's a strange mood story about an idiot, a
woman named Bianca, who has beautiful, sensuous hands with a life all their own.
A young man is obsessed with her hands, marries Bianca, and the hands strangle
him. Sturgeon says the idea for Bianca's Hands came to him while he was involved
with a sports story. I was hard at work at it, and the idea for Bianca's Hands
came in flat-wise. And I said, in fact, go away. I'm busy. And the idea came
back again. And I said, well, finally, oh, all right. And I wrote it in about
three hours, that's all, just to get it out of my way. And then I finished the
sports story, which I sold eventually. But I put that manuscript in the bottom
drawer. I knew I had a very unusual story here, and I kept it like one of the
family jewels. And in about three years, I got hungry enough to say, well, I've
got to sell the family jewels. And I found to my amazement, I couldn't give the
story away. It was nearly ten years before anybody would look seriously at it.
But in the meantime, where I submitted it, it made, well, there were two
occasions, once an editor and once an agent. They said, bring your stuff around,
let's have a look at it, you know. I'd come around on Tuesday. I'd go in on
Tuesday, and the secretary would say, go on in there. And you had a guy sitting
there, and he's trembling with anger. He's furious. He says, here, take this
stuff. Once he pushed it off onto the floor, I had to pick it up. Take this
stuff and get out of here. I don't want to deal with anybody who writes a story
like Bianca's hand. Get out of here. Why? What's the matter? Why do you say
that? Never mind. I don't want to talk about it. And, you know, I left very hurt
and very puzzled, and not knowing, you know, what was going on with these
people. Anyway, finally, a friend of mine wrote to me from England that there
was a literary contest in England in a magazine called Argosy, and the deadline
was New Year's Eve. Well, I got his letter at Christmas Eve. So I dug this thing
out of the trunk and ran it through the top without changing anything and sent
it off. But it must have arrived, you know, within minutes of the deadline. And
it won the contest. And I beat Graham Greene and John Pudney and a number of
famous people and got the first check I'd ever seen for over $1,000 and got much
glory out of it. And it, too, has been repented a great number of times. But
that's the back story on that. But where the idea came from, I cannot really
tell you. Sturgeon says Bianca's hands is essentially a love story, and that on
a deep psychological level, death and love are intimately related. On our next
show, we'll continue talking with science fiction author Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The 89Cube Hoje in Odessa, Texas. Jan sl общем andives
poetry foraging it UP to 8 teams, wonderful teams for gele deed. While pursuing
peace can afford to appear at that point of faith, make thingsaskchips, from
whey to make all the best experiences, this story a way to get all of it. lid
oscub's themes you'd often re legally, how bother to fulfill this together?
Instead, the demonstra with America and this show's family of love talking about
judwa,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Theodore Sturgeon began publishing science
fiction in the late 1930s, and he's been influential ever since. We asked him
what changes he's seen in the field in the 40-plus years he's been in it. One
thing he mentioned is the quality of writing, that it has improved greatly since
the days of the pulps. And today, he feels, science fiction has produced authors
whose work is as good as anything being written today. Sturgeon sees another
large change, too. The other thing that's happened, of course, is women. There
have always been women in science fiction. As a matter of fact, somebody who
started science fiction as we know it was a woman. The lady who wrote
Frankenstein. As she was a teenager. If I had a time machine, I would go back
and talk to that lady. I really would. She must have been something else.
Amazing woman. Amazing. I think she was 19 when she wrote Frankenstein. Mary
Shelley. Mary Shelley published Frankenstein in 1819, some time ago. But
Sturgeon goes on to mention the great number of modern science fiction writers
who are women. But the women who have been into science fiction, one of the very
best was Judy Merrill. Back in the 40s, she wrote some of the, well, if you look
in the Hall of Fame of science fiction, you'll find a Judy Merrill story in
there called That Only a Mother. Which was not only, it was not only a Judy
Merrill story, but it was the first story she'd ever written. The first sale she
ever made. She sold her first story, and that was it. Just an extraordinary
story. Really powerful. Then there are people, like I just mentioned. Then Wild
Seeds, for example, is a lovely story. There's Ursula K. Le Guin, who has won a
National Book Award. There's Doris Bissertia, whose ideas are always so totally
unexpected. There's Elizabeth Lynn. There's, oh, on and on and on. The women in
science fiction are just extraordinary. I remember a lady in Detroit said to me
that up to now it's been, the woman has to work twice as hard and be twice as
good as a man before she can get the same recognition. Then she added,
fortunately, that's not difficult. Which is a great line.
Sturgeon believes, too, that not only are there a great number of women writers
of science fiction, but most of them are superior writers. But I admire the
women in science fiction so very much. Somebody said recently that there are so
many excellent women in science fiction that at long last it's possible to say
that they found a mediocre one. And it has been true. They've had to be better
than the men to get where they are. One of the great revelations in science
fiction, of course, you probably know about it, was James Tiptree, who turns out
after having been a shattering success, to be a lady by the name of Alice
Sheldon. That was a great astonishment to a lot of people. She kept her head
under her wing for so long that all sorts of rumors started that she was a CIA
man, or that she was a collaboration between, you know, Jerry Poitale and
somebody else or something. But no, sir, she's her own man. She's good. Oh,
she's good. Says Kate Wilhelm. Who writes a beautiful, steady prose. She's very,
very good. That's Damon Knight's wife. So I'm more pleased than almost anything
else about science fiction in that it has let the women in to such a total
degree. And they're good. Almost every single one of them has really got
something unique to bring to the field and to literature as a whole. I'm
fascinated by women. I love the way they think. There is a difference. I'm not
talking just equality, because there is a difference between the way men think
and the way women do. And I'm utterly fascinated by the way women think. On our
next show, we'll conclude our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Theodore Sturgeon's writing talent would
have made him successful in any form of literature he chose to work with. But
fortunately, he chose science fiction, and many of his stories and novels are
now among the acknowledged classics of the field. More Than Human, published in
1953, is probably his best-known novel. Some of his more famous short stories
are Thunder and Roses, The Microcosmic God, Killdozer, and Slow Sculpture, which
won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards in 1970. Sturgeon is also convinced of the
worth of science fiction, and keeps up with his development and changes. We
asked Sturgeon if science fiction is becoming more acceptable to the general
reading public. Yeah, science fiction is becoming the mainstream. Really, look
at all the pictures that came out last year, for example, last summer, with a
heavy emphasis on science fiction. People are beginning to realize that this
forefront thinking is predictive or precognitive thinking. It's at some moment.
There are a lot of people who would not recognize that 1984 was a science
fiction novel until very recently. I mean, Kingsley Amos once wrote that the
reaction to the general public and the so-called serious critic to science
fiction is, hey, this is good. This can't be science fiction. Or, hey, this is
science fiction. It can't be good. You know. And this is the ghetto that science
fiction has had to grow up in. But if you can survive in a ghetto, you generally
come out strong. I think that's the case with science fiction now. But I stuck
with it, not because I couldn't write other kinds of things, and probably do
quite well, because I simply loved the field and the freedom that it gives me.
Sturgeon is also the originator of what has come to be called Sturgeon's Law. He
tells us how that came about. Oh, that came about sometime in the 50s, and I
can't remember exactly where it was, but it was at a science fiction convention,
and there was somebody who came to, you know, some people like to make an impact
by getting a whole bunch of people who like a particular thing and coming up and
tearing it all to pieces. And he'd done his homework. He got a copy of every
magazine that was in the hotel newsstand and every book, and they apparently
spent all night leafing through them. And he had a whole forearm full of books
and magazines with bookmarks in them. And he convulsed the audience there for
about 40 minutes with examples of some of the worst syntax, some of the dumbest
dialogue, some of the most improbable science, and so on, which in those days,
science fiction was a whole lot of it. And then he said to me right on stage,
will you or will you not concede that this science fiction is 90% crap? And I
answered, I had this rush of brains to the head, and I answered him by saying,
yes, but that's only because 90% of everything is crap, which quite took the
wind out of his sails. Then I was able to go on and develop the idea, which is
only true, that science fiction has been in the ghetto for so long that people
say, oh, this is like Kingsley Amis said, this is science fiction, it can't be
good. And it was unique as a literary genre in that it was not permitted its
spectrum of poor and good. Let us say in the mystery field, everybody could
distinguish between, let us say, Mickey Spillane and somebody like Nio Marsh or
Dorothy L. Sayers. There's a spectrum of excellence there. Some of these things
are better than others. Same thing in the Westerns. Hopalong Cassidy is not the
same thing as Best Three Rides a Game. But science fiction, it was all, you
know, Buck Rogers, Zap Guns, and Space in the year 2200. And nobody would have
twice on the fact to find that there was good science fiction and bad science
fiction and excellent and poor writing. And that caused my response. But since
then, that's been called Sturgeon's Law that 90% of this is bad because 90% of
everything is bad. The present company accepted, of course.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
help your language perfect for any change. www.youtube.com episode 5 David S.
Thank you.